Changelog 2.20.0 (#8068)
timescale/timescaledb: CHANGELOG.md

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.20.0 (2025-05-13)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since the 2.19.3 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.20.0**
* Faster point queries with bloom filters
* Backfill improvements into compressed chunks
* SkipScan
* Bool vectorization
* experimental support for window and immutable functions available in Continous Aggregations

> **PostgreSQL 13 support removal announcement**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**PostgreSQL 14 support removal announcement**
```

* [#7972](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7972) Add vectorized filtering for constraint checking while backfilling into compressed chunks
* [#7976](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7976) Include Continuous Aggregate name in jobs informational view.
* [#7977](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7977) Replace references to compression with columnstore
* [#7981](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7981) Add columnstore as alias for enable_columnstore in `ALTER TABLE`
* [#7983](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7983) Support for SkipScan over compressed data
* [#7991](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7991) Improves default segmentby options
* [#7992](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7992) Add API into hypertable invalidation log
* [#8000](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8000) Add primary dimension info to information schema
* [#8005](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8005) Support `ALTER TABLE SET (timescaledb.chunk_time_interval='1 day')`
* [#8012](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8012) Add event triggers support on chunk creation

> * [#8014](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8014) enable bool compression by default by setting `timescaledb.enable_bool_compression=true`. Note: for downgrading to `2.18` or earlier version one needs to use the provided downgrade script in 'timescaledb-extras'.

Reviewer: We can add a link pointing to the script. WDYT?

Author: Yes, good call. I'll add the link

Author: done.

* [#8047](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8027) Support SkipScan for `SELECT DISTINCT` with multiple distincts when all but one distinct is pinned

**Bugfixes**
* [#7862](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7862) Release cache pin when checking for `NOT NULL`
* [#7909](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7909) Update compression stats when merging chunks
* [#7928](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7928) Don't create a hypertable for implicitly published tables
* [#7982](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7982) Fix crash in batch sort merge over eligible expressions
* [#8008](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8008) Fix compression policy error message that shows number of successes
* [#8031](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8031) Fix reporting of deleted tuples for direct batch delete
* [#8033](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8033) Skip default segmentby if orderby is explicitly set
* [#8061](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8061) Ensure settings for a compressed relation are found

**GUCs**
* `timescaledb.enable_bool_compression`

> * `timescaledb.enable_sparse_index_bloom`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `timescaledb.enable_sparse_index_bloom`
* `timescaledb.enable_event_triggers`
```

Author: thank you, added through https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8068/commits/bdb1eca652c60088e93b3dc14c52096c961db203

`psql` with the `-X` flag to prevent any `.psqlrc` commands from
accidentally triggering the load of a previous DB version.**

## 2.20.0 (2025-05-13)

This release contains performance improvements and bug fixes since the 2.19.3 release. We recommend that you upgrade at the next available opportunity.

**Highlighted features in TimescaleDB v2.20.0**
* The columnstore now leverages *bloom filters* to significantly accelerate queries targeting rare values. This is particularly impactful for point queries on text-heavy columns like UUIDs, delivering up to a 6x performance boost.
* Major *improvements to the backfill process in the columnstore* enable for 10x faster `UPSERTS` with strict constraints in place.
* *SkipScan is now supported in the columnstore*, including for DISTINCT queries. This enhancement leads to dramatic query performance improvements of 2000x to 2500x, especially for selective queries.
* Vectorization for the bool data type in the columnstore is now enabled by default. This change results in a 30–45% increase in performance for analytical queries with bool clauses.

> * *Continuous Aggregations*  now include experimental support for *window functions and immutable functions*, extending analytical capabilities directly within CAggs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* *Continuous aggregations*  now include experimental support for *window functions and immutable functions*, extending analytical capabilities directly within continuous aggregates.
```

> * Several quality-of-life improvements have been introduced with job names for Continuous Aggregates are now more descriptive, users can assign custom names to user-defined actions and it is now possible to add unique constraints along with ADD COLUMN operations in the columnstore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Several quality-of-life improvements have been introduced: job names for continuous aggregates are now more descriptive, you can assign custom names to them, and it is now possible to add unique constraints along with `ADD COLUMN` operations in the columnstore.
```

> * Ability to manually *split large uncompressed chunks* at a specified point in time using the `split_chunk` function, providing finer control over chunk management.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Improved management and optimization of chunks with the ability to split large uncompressed chunks at a specified point in time using the `split_chunk` function. This new function complements the existing `merge_chunk` function that can be used to merge two small chunks into one larger chunk. 
```

* Enhancements to the default behavior of the columnstore now provide better *automatic assessments* of `segment by` and `order by` columns, reducing the need for manual configuration and simplifying initial setup.

**PostgreSQL 14 support removal announcement**

> Following the deprecation announcement for PostgreSQL 14 in TimescaleDB v2.19.0, PostgreSQL 14 is no longer supported in TimescaleDB v2.20.0. The Currently supported PostgreSQL major versions are 15, 16 and 17.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the deprecation announcement for PostgreSQL 14 in TimescaleDB v2.19.0, PostgreSQL 14 is no longer supported in TimescaleDB v2.20.0. The currently supported PostgreSQL major versions are 15, 16, and 17.
```

**Features**

> * [#7638](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7638) Bloom filter sparse indexes for compressed columns. Can be disabled with the GUC `timescaledb.enable_sparse_index_bloom`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#7638](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7638) Bloom filter sparse indexes for compressed columns. Can be disabled with the GUC `timescaledb.enable_sparse_index_bloom`
```

* [#7756](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7756) Add warning for poor compression ratio

> * [#7762](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7762) Speed up the queries that use minmax sparse indexes on compressed tables by changing the index TOAST storage type to `MAIN`. This applies to newly compressed chunks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#7762](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7762) Speed up the queries that use minmax sparse indexes on compressed tables by changing the index TOAST storage type to `MAIN`. This applies to newly compressed chunks
```

* [#7868](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7868) Allow adding columns with `CHECK` constraints to compressed chunks
* [#7874](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7874) Support for SkipScan for distinct aggregates over the same column
* [#7877](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7877) Remove blocker for unique constraints with `ADD COLUMN`
* [#7878](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7878) Don't block non-immutable functions in continuous aggregates
* [#7880](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7880) Add experimental support for window functions in caggs
* [#7899](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7899) Vectorized decompression and filtering for boolean columns
* [#7915](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7915) New option `refresh_newest_first` to CAgg refresh policy API
* [#7917](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7917) Remove `_timescaledb_functions.create_chunk_table` function
* [#7929](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7929) Add `CREATE TABLE ... WITH` API for creating hypertables
* [#7946](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7946) Add support for splitting a chunk

> * [#7958](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7958) Allow custom names for user-defined actions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#7958](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7958) Allow custom names for jobs
```

* [#7972](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7972) Add vectorized filtering for constraint checking while backfilling into compressed chunks

> * [#7976](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7976) Include Continuous Aggregate name in jobs informational view.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#7976](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7976) Include continuous aggregate name in jobs informational view
```

* [#7977](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7977) Replace references to compression with columnstore

> * [#7981](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7981) Add columnstore as alias for enable_columnstore in `ALTER TABLE`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#7981](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7981) Add columnstore as alias for `enable_columnstore `in `ALTER TABLE`
```

* [#7983](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7983) Support for SkipScan over compressed data

> * [#7991](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7991) Improves default segmentby options

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#7991](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7991) Improves default `segmentby` options
```

* [#7992](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7992) Add API into hypertable invalidation log
* [#8000](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8000) Add primary dimension info to information schema
* [#8005](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8005) Support `ALTER TABLE SET (timescaledb.chunk_time_interval='1 day')`
* [#8012](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8012) Add event triggers support on chunk creation

> * [#8014](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8014) enable bool compression by default by setting `timescaledb.enable_bool_compression=true`. Note: for downgrading to `2.18` or earlier version one needs to use the provided [this downgrade script](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-extras/blob/master/utils/2.19.0-downgrade_new_compression_algorithms.sql).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#8014](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8014) Enable bool compression by default by setting `timescaledb.enable_bool_compression=true`. Note: for downgrading to `2.18` or earlier version, use [this downgrade script](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb-extras/blob/master/utils/2.19.0-downgrade_new_compression_algorithms.sql)
```

* [#8018](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8018) Add spin-lock during recompression on unique constraints

> * [#8026](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8026) Allow `WHERE` conditions that use nonvolatile functions to be pushed down to the compressed scan level. For example, conditions like `time > now()`, where `time` is a columnstore orderby column, will evaluate `now()` and use the sparse index on `time` to filter out the entire compressed batches that cannot contain matching rows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#8026](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8026) Allow `WHERE` conditions that use nonvolatile functions to be pushed down to the compressed scan level. For example, conditions like `time > now()`, where `time` is a columnstore `orderby` column, will evaluate `now()` and use the sparse index on `time` to filter out the entire compressed batches that cannot contain matching rows.
```

* [#8027](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8027) Add materialization invalidations API
* [#8047](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8027) Support SkipScan for `SELECT DISTINCT` with multiple distincts when all but one distinct is pinned

**Bugfixes**
* [#7862](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7862) Release cache pin when checking for `NOT NULL`
* [#7909](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7909) Update compression stats when merging chunks
* [#7928](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7928) Don't create a hypertable for implicitly published tables
* [#7982](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/7982) Fix crash in batch sort merge over eligible expressions
* [#8008](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8008) Fix compression policy error message that shows number of successes
* [#8031](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8031) Fix reporting of deleted tuples for direct batch delete

> * [#8033](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8033) Skip default segmentby if orderby is explicitly set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [#8033](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8033) Skip default `segmentby` if `orderby` is explicitly set
```

* [#8061](https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8061) Ensure settings for a compressed relation are found

**GUCs**
* `timescaledb.enable_sparse_index_bloom`: Enable creation of the bloom1 sparse index on compressed chunks.
* `timescaledb.compress_truncate_behaviour`: Defines how truncate behaves at the end of compression.
* `timescaledb.enable_compression_ratio_warnings`: Enable warnings for poor compression ratio.
* `timescaledb.enable_event_triggers`: Enable event triggers for chunks creation.

> * `timescaledb.enable_cagg_window_functions`: Enable window functions in continuous aggregates.

Author: That would be helpful, did it the last time :) pushing a commit

> * `timescaledb.enable_cagg_window_functions`: Enable window functions in continuous aggregates.

Author: done via https://github.com/timescale/timescaledb/pull/8068/commits/8a4d0efd407739c71f460d818cf7b7dd7d0af5fe
